# Reactive Operators

If we look at the previous example, `01_CustomData`, we might see one potential issue: We always process the same number of objects in the sink that were generated by the source. What if we need pipelines that can filter out messages in the middle or create new ones as needed?

This is where the Reactive-style operators come in to use. MRC's Reactive-style operators make it easy to perform common tasks like:
* filtering: `mrc.core.operators.filter`
* mapping: `mrc.core.operators.map`
* combining: `mrc.core.operators.to_list` & `mrc.core.operators.pairwise`
* flattening: `mrc.core.operators.flatten`

To use these operators, we first need to use a different function instead of `make_node`. We will be using the more verbose `make_node_full` function which takes a lambda function with the signature: `def lambda_fn(src: mrc.Observable, dst: mrc.Suscriber)`.

Inside of this lambda, you are required to do one thing: connect the `src` to the `dst` using the `subscribe` method. For example, the `Segment.make_node(map_fn)` function is shorthand for the following:

```python
def node_fn(src: mrc.Observable, dst: mrc.Suscriber):
   src.pipe(
      mrc.core.operators.map(map_fn)
   ).subscribe(dst)
```

The initial call to `mrc.Observable.pipe()` inidicates you would like to pipe every message from the `src` through some reactive operators. Inside of `pipe()` you can supply one or more operators to process messages in order. Finally, the call to `subscribe()` passes the result of the pipe'ed messages to the argument of `subscribe()`.

Lets look at a more complex example:

```python
value_count = 0
value_sum = 0

def node_fn(src: mrc.Observable, dst: mrc.Subscriber):
    def update_obj(x: MyCustomClass):
        nonlocal value_count
        nonlocal value_sum

        # Alter the value property of the class
        x.value = x.value * 2

        # Update the sum values
        value_count += 1
        value_sum += x.value

        return x

    def on_completed():

        # Prevent divide by 0. Just in case
        if (value_count <= 0):
            return

        return MyCustomClass(value_sum / value_count, "Mean")

    src.pipe(
       ops.filter(lambda x: x.value % 2 == 0),
       ops.map(update_obj),
       ops.on_completed(on_completed)
    ).subscribe(dst)

# Make an intermediate node
node = seg.make_node_full("node", node_fn)
```

In this example, we are using 3 different operators: `filter`, `map`, and `on_completed`:

- The `filter` operator will only pass through messages where the lambda is evaluated to `True`
  - In our example, we are filtering out all messages with an odd `value`.
- The `map` operator can transform the incoming value and return a new value
  - In our example, we are doubling the `value` property and recording the total count and total sum of this property
- The `on_completed` function is only called once when there are no more messages to process. You can optionally return a value which will be passed on to the rest of the pipeline.
  - In our example, we are calculating the average from the sum and count values and emitting a new obect with the value set to the mean

In combination, these operators perform a higher level functionality to modify the stream, record some information, and finally print an analysis of all emitted values. Let's see it in practice.

## Running the Example

If we run the example, we will see the following output:

```bash
$ python ./docs/quickstart/python/mrc_qs_python/ex02_reactive_operators/run.py
mrc pipeline starting...
Sink: Got Obj Name: Instance-0, Value: 0
Sink: Got Obj Name: Instance-2, Value: 4
Sink: Got Obj Name: Instance-4, Value: 8
Sink: Got Obj Name: Mean, Value: 4.0
mrc pipeline completed.
```

In this example, we emitted 5 values: 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 but we only see 4 output messages by the sink. This is expected since we were filtering out all of the odd messages and emitting a single message at the end with the mean of all messages.

What would be the output if we increased the number of messages to 6? What would happen if we changed the order of the `filter` and `map` operators?
